I did not grow up wanting to be a professor, a researcher, or a teacher. In fact, like most youth, I didn't even really think about careers until college. When I was ten, all I knew was that I liked jump ropes, cats, origami, Super Mario Bros., and math puzzles. When I was fifteen, I knew that I liked making simple games on my graphing calculator and reading historical fiction. And when I was twenty, even though I was a computer science major, I knew I didn't want to be a software engineer. I thought that it involved programming alone in smelly basements, making things that other people wanted me to make. My dream was to have a job where I had no boss, and I could follow my curiosity, dream up new ideas with friends, and then tell people about what we'd made. As I soon learned from one of my CS professors that a tenure-track professor at a research university does roughly that, I was hooked: I wanted to be a professor.

Of course, I soon learned the world was far more complicated that I imagined. Software engineers don't sit in smelly basements alone. And they don't just work with other software engineers. They work with interaction designers, who envision _what_ information systems should do. They work with product managers who ensure that what designers envision and engineers build meets a market or stakeholder need. They work with graphic designers who make visual assets. They work with database administrators who ensure that data can be quickly stored and retrieved. They work with information architects to decide how to structure data and it's metadata. And managers work with all of these roles to ensure everyone has the resources, skills, and psychological safety to thrive in their work. I just couldn't see of this from the confines of school. And when I co-founded a tech startup, it became even more apparent, as I helped build the teams that would envision and create our services. 

Learning about this diversity of roles, and taking on those various roles as a founder, didn't make me want those roles more than I wanted to be a professor. I still wanted the ultimaely freedom to explore that only academia can provide. But it helped me understand that designing, creating, and maintaining information systems is never solo work, and requires far more skills than any one person can possess. And because information systems are used in every aspect of society--government, science, and industry of all kinds--understanding how organizations come together to do this work is a crucial part of understanding information. In this final chapter of this book, we will define and discuss these various careers, how they leverage the ideas we've discussed in this book, and how they are a crucial aspect of getting people the information they need.

|JobFair.jpg|A top down photograph of a job fair in Portland, Oregon.|People with information skills learning about organizations they might join.|Portland Community College|

# Information careers

Throughout this book, we've shown how information systems are fundamentally about people making and moving information with the help of technology. And because they're largely composed of people, their decisions, assumptions, beliefs, and values are the foundation of how those systems work and for whom they work. But information systems are also fundamentally created and maintained by people: people build and repair the technology that runs them, people create the information that runs thorugh them, and quite often, people are critical parts of operating information systems, translating, transmitting, interpreting, and combinining information for other people to use. Whether it is writing, printing, and distributing books, creating and maintaining web scale websites, or organizing online communities, all information systems intricately combine human effort with technology to make information work. And if you take away any one of these three things--people, information, or technology--the information system stops functioning.

Industry, then, is ultimately about organizing people to keep information systems working. There are many distinct kinds of work involved in this effort, and each kind of work requires distinct skills and knowledge to be successful. For example, the most central work in envisioning information systems is *design*, which, as we discussed in the [Designing Information|design], involves deciding what an information system will do and why. What information will it have? Who will it inform? Where will the information come from? How should the information be structured? Which values will the system uphold?

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/R0ffUjavxxs|Day in the Life of a Product Manager|Product managers decide how information systems should meet customer needs by working with engineers, designers, and other stakeholders.|Yelp|

Because this design work is so critical, there are many different roles in organizations that do it. While one might expect design work to be done by designers, in most organizations, there is actually a role above design called *product management* that ultimately answers the questiosn above. Product managers are in charge of finding the intersection between design opportunities and business opportunities, identifying groups of people who have some information need and envisioning some way of meeting that need through an information system. For example, consider the video above, which showcases a Yelp product manager, who talks about her work with multiple teams to make product decisions. Another example would be a Vice President of Product at a company like Netflix, who might be ultimately in charge of ensuring that people find so many movies and television shows that they want to watch that they would never think of canceling their subscription, and that finding and watching them is so easy that they never cancel out of frustration. Netflix, of course, has many lower-level product managers, some for content, some for mobile apps, some of integrations on other platforms, all working toward the shared goals of getting great content to subscribers and keeping them subscribed. Product managers, as the ultimate decision makers about what information systems do and who they serve, have immense power, and thus are perhaps more responsible than anyone else at ensuring that products are inclusive, and do not further reinforce systems of oppression (e.g., by deprioritizing accessbility, locking out people with disabilities from key information resources).

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/JbhTj4_aylY|User Experience Researcher: How I got my job & where I'm going|User experience researchers help understand people's information needs, to inform product design chocies.|Khan Academy|

Product managers, as the deciders, are usually not implementors. Instead, that work typically gets delegated to a range of different roles. One increasingly common role is *user experience (UX) research*. UX researchers gather insights about the information problems that users face and how they currently solve them, helping a product manager find opportunities for products. For example, in the video above, a UX researcher at Google talks about her career path into UX research, and her work on Google Maps, which largely involves understanding how people use maps to navigate their lives, and how Google Maps might help them do that better. UX researchers at Netflix might do similar work, interviewing a broad sample of families about how they use Netflix, or conduct surveys with families that don't yet have Netflix, to understand why they haven't yet subscribed.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/HvUHyZb1-9Y|What does a UX designer do?|UX designers decide how users will interact with products to get the information they need.|TechCrunch|

In contrast to UX research, *user experience (UX) design* is about envisioning how an information system might meet an information need. For example, in the video above, a UX designer at the bra company True & Co talks about her work to understand where customers are getting stuck in the fitting and purchasing process, and envisioning features that might solve those problems by providing information. Her work involves analyzing insights about user experience possibly from UX researchers, and envisioniong design changes to improve those experiences. Similarly, a UX designer at Netflix might lead a project to redesign the watch screen interface and it's various controls to make it more accessible to people who are blind or low vision. Therefore, whereas product managers set the high level strategy for what system to make, and UX researchers inform that strategy by studying people's needs, UX designers figure out how to actually meet those needs.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/_lwzWdO8AI8|What does an information architect do?|Information architects determine how to organize, label, and structure information to support searching, browsing, and navigation.|UXClub.com|

Whereas UX designers typically focus on features and experience, *information architects* focus on the information aspects of those features and experiences, including what information a system needs to expose, how it will be structured, what metadata needs to be manintained about it, where the information will come from, how it will be presented in an interface, and how it will be searched, browsed, and navigated. The video above gives an overview of some of the many tasks that information architects do, ranging from designing site navigation, choosing labels, and designing database schemas for a website. Continuing our Netflix example, an information architect might be responsible for defining movie genre categories, ensuring movies have consistent metadata about directors and actors, and envisioning new ways for users to search and browse content, in collaboration with UX designers.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/_R8bIIQxajA|Airbnb Software Engineer|Software engineers implement designs envisioned by UX designers.|TechCrunch|

Whereas UX researchers write reports about what they have discovered, UX designers create prototypes envisioning products, and information architects design site maps, taxonomies, labels, and database schemas, *software engineers* are responsible for engineering all of those decisions as code. In the video above, an Airbnb engineer describes her work to make the Airbnb reservation process stable, fast, and reliable, and helping to prioritize features and bug fixes. Similarly, at Netflix, a software engineer might be responsible for improving streaming reliability, building the user interfaces for the numerous platforms on which Netflix runs, implement search, and maintain all of this functionality as operating systems and platforms evolve.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/Mo41yl9IPZ8|Illustrator & Product Designer at Dropbox|Graphic designers and illustrators create visual assets for information systems.|TechCrunch|

Most information systems are more than just data and code; in fact, many of the ways that we experience information are first through the visual elements of interfaces, from typographic choices like fonts, layout, and spacing, to graphical choices, like images, textures, and illustrations. *Graphic designers* define these visual experiences, choosing fonts, defining layouts for screens and print, and creating graphics and other content consistent with an organization's brand and values. For example, in the video above, an illustrator at Dropbox describes her role creating content for the Dropbox brand. Similar, at Netflix, graphic designers maintain the logo, the colors, and the various textures on the website, and ensure consistency with marketing or sales efforts.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/pP0ya8JVrkg|What is a product scientist?|Data scientists typically gather and analyze data to answer product questions.|TechCrunch|

Once an information system is available for use, most organizations need to understand how users are using it, where they are getting stuck, and what might be improved about the experience. These problems of product evaluation often fall to people in data gathering roles. This might include UX researchers, who might be charged with using interviews, surveys, observations, and other methods to try to understand customers' experiences with a system. Another role often charged with this task is *data scientists*, who might use data sets such logs of user activity to gather data, analyze it, and use it answer questions that a UX designer or product manager might have. For example, in the video above, a data scientist (creatively given the title "Product Scientist") at Medium describes his work to understand reader behavior on the website to help designers improve reading experiences.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/_Z6453ihM3Q|Polyvore's Community Director|Customer experience teams ensure people can use information systems successfully, and offer insight into customer experience for design.|TechCrunch|

UX researchers and data scientists aren't the only roles that gather insights about people's experiences with information systems. *Customer experience specialists*--also known as _customer support specialists_ or _community directors_ if an information system involves a community of users--respond to user feedback, write technical support and documentation, and moderate online communiites. Because they work so closely with users, they often have the deepest insights into what is and isn't working about an information system. For example, in the video above, a community director describes her work to help customers, while gathering and sharing insights with people across her company to influence product design. At Netflix, such roles might respond to customer confusion about billing, organize feature requests, and monitor social media for complaints and feedback.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/ZZ9ROUf48Vs|Pinterest's Head of Engineering|Project managers make sure their team has what they need to collaborate and succeed.|TechCrunch|

When teams get big enough, *project managers* become necessary to keep teams productive. Note that _project_ managers are different from _product_ managers in that _project_ managers oversee people and their needs on a project, whereas _product_ managers manage the product and it's ability to meet a need in a marketpalce. Therefore, while a product manager is worrying about customers, their needs, and how information systems an organization is creating are meeting them, a project manager is worrying about the designers, researchers, and engineers they are managing. They ensure that teams are working well together, that they have the resources they need from the organization to do their job, and that they feel safe giving feedback about problems they're seeing, and solving those problems with their teammates. Whereas product managers are trying to make the business work, project managers are trying to make people work. The video above with the head of Pinterest's engineering team shows that much of his time is spent recruiting and hiring new engineers, making sure they're working well together, ensuring the team sets and achieves its goals. The same role at Netflix might ensure the group of site reliability engineers can work together productively to ensure that Netflix never goes down.

Importantly, all organization divide up this work in different ways, using different titles, and grant different powers and responsibilities. In some organizations, engineers might also play the role of product manager, making decisions about product strategy and features; for example, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is known to frequently make product decisions, even though Facebook has a Chief Product Officer in charge of such high level decisions. In some organizations, there might not be any designers of any kind, leaving graphic design, experience design, and information architecture to sales teams, marketing teams, or engineers. Some organizations might combine roles; for example, Microsoft has many software engineers who are largely responsible for project management, and sometimes product management, while also contributing to code. Selecting an information career therefore isn't about choosing a specific title, but developing a set of skills and finding organizations that need them, however they've decided to organize the work.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/RECB628s004|KidsTeam UW at the iSchool|Researchers answer big questions about information systems, which shape what is taught in schools and univerities, and what systems are created in government, industry, and community organizations.|UW Information School|

Whereas all of the roles above are common in for-profit and not-for-profit organizations, as well as government, another crucial part of shaping information systems is *research*. Academic researchers, not to be confused with UX researchers, aren't focused on questions specific to products or businesses, but on questions that are relevant to all organizations and all of society. For example, the video above features Information School professor Jason Yip's research on youth perspectives on information technology in homes. His research shapes design education, and also informs the work of product designers in industry who might be envisioning technologies for families, as well as policy makers who might be regulating information technologies that enter homes. Without research, there would be less knowledge about how to design information systems, less knowledge to teach information systems design, and fewer critical questions about what impact information technology is having on our lives. Organizations in industry therefore depend on academia to develop information system skills, to deepen our understanding of how to do those skills well, and to ask challlenging moral, ethical, and philosophical questions about what systems we make and why.

|Curiosity.jpg|A photograph of a small child kneeling, playing with sand|Abilities and interests are developed, not discovered.|[MI PHAM|https://unsplash.com/photos/ZcA4ai3bRSk]|

# Developing skills and interests

For anyone considering careers in information, it is easy to imagine the roles above as out of reach. In fact, many students come to college with beliefs that they aren't good at particular subjects, shamed for academic failures by peers and teachers, or deterred from particular subjects by cultural stereotypes or stigmas<spencer16>. The result is that many have what researchers call a *fixed theory of intelligence* and a *fixed theory of interest*: beliefs that abilities and interests are innate from birth<dweck08,okeefe18>. Neither beliefs are true--we are all born with the ability to learn new skills and develop new interests--but society often reinforces fixed theories of intelligence and interest by propogating myths that certain individuals or groups are better or worse at particular academi subjects. These fixed mindsets limit our desire to explore new skills and interests, creating a destructive believe that talents and passions must be "found."

The reality is that talents and passions must be developed. The majority of differences in human ability come from deliberate practice, not innate talent<ericsson93>, and interests come from our social and cultural experiences, not our DNA<hidi06>. The work of developing skills and interests then, is not about discovering innate talents or interests, but _developing_ them. This might entail taking classes to learn new skills, and recognizing that any difficulties encountered in that learning are more a product of the quality of instruction and your practice, rather than any innate inability. And developing interests might entail finding supportive, inclusive communities with mentors and activities that catalyze new interests that you did not have before. Developing a passion is hard work.

Fortunately, because abilities and interests are not innate, there is no right answer. This is particularly important to remember in information careers, where advances in research and industry on information technology mean that the skills required to contribute are constantly changing, and organizations are constantly finding new ways to organize work. One might begin with an interest in software engineering, but later become enamored with data science or design; ten years into a career of information architecture, one might develop an enterprenurial spirit, and decide to become a CEO. These many career pivots are a normal byproduct of learning, joining new communities, and developing new interests.

Of course, communities can also suffocate learning and deter interests. Consider, for example, the conflict in 2020, with algorithmic bias expert Timnit Gebru. She had spent a long career studying electrical engineering, then worked at Apple on signal processing algorithms. She later earned her Ph.D. doing research on bias in image collections. This led to an intrest in AI ethics, and eventually to a position at Google, where she worked as both a researcher of AI ethics, but also an advocate for justice in addressing issues of systemtic bias in facial recognition, language processing, and other AI technologies. Her public advocacy, her research, her insistence on transparency, Google's apparent resistance to publishing research critical about AI, led her to be fired, and threatening her ability to pursue her interests. Organizational conflicts like this--as well as the many other issues of sexual harassment, abuses of power, and disagreements about organizations' moral and ethical stances on information systems--mean that choosing information careers also means investing in ways of making organizations more diverse, equitable, inclusive, and just, so that the systems we make reflect everyone's needs.

|NotOKGoogle.jpg|A photograph of a Google walkout, with a sign that says "Not OK Google"|Organizations that create information systems have power, with comes with conflict and responsiblity|Reuters|

-

Pursuing careers in information, and encountering conflicts in organizations, reinforce the social and cultural nature of organizations that engage in information system design, and the central questions of power at the heart of these organizations. Who decides what we make? What values shape what we make? And when the people involved in making them disagree with an organizations strategic direction, what power do they have to resist that decision? Careers in information can be impactful, lucrative, and meaningful, but because of the increasing power given to information systems and the organizations that create them, organizations can also be sites of cultural tension and moral responsibility. What information problems do you want to solve in the world. Why? And which organizations can help you do that?

# Podcasts

* _[Timnit Gebru Tells Her Story, In Machines We Trust, MIT Technology Review|https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/12/16/1014634/google-ai-ethics-lead-timnit-gebru-tells-story/]_. Gebru describes the toxic work environment at Google that punished advocacy, community organizing, and ultimately scientific progress on AI ethics.

* _[Does Google Actually Want to Hire Black Engineers?, What Next TBD, Slate|https://slate.com/podcasts/what-next-tbd/2021/03/google-hbcus-hiring]_. Discusses the problematic and incrementally effective partnership between Google and HBCU's.

* _[Project Maven, Recode Daily, Vox|https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/project-maven/id1479107698?i=1000513649831]_. Discusses a Google Department of Defense weapons contract and an internal effort by some Google employees to protest and resist the project, resulting its cancelation.

* _[A Union Drive at Amazon, The Daily, New York Times|https://the-daily.simplecast.com/episodes/20210401-5vfXdpMs]_. Discusses the extreme employee surveillance at Amazon warehouses, and how those surveillance activities led to unionization efforts at one warehouse in Bessember, Alabama.