When I was in middle school, there were no smartphones and there was no internet. Friendship, therefore, was about proximity: I eagerly woke up and rushed to the bus stop each morning not to get to school, but to see my friends, all of whom lived within a mile of my house. Lunch was always the highlight of the day, where we could share our favorite moments of the latest Pinky and the Brain skit on [Animaniacs|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Animaniacs], gossip about our teachers, and make plans for after school. On the bus ride home, we would chart out our homework plans, so we could reunite at 4 or 5 pm to play [Super Nintendo|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super_Nintendo_Entertainment_System] together, play basketball at the local primary school playground, or ride our bikes to the corner store for candy. If we were feeling lonely, we might head to our kitchens to our wired landline phone, call each other's houses, politely ask whoever answered to give to the phone to our friend, and covertly coordinate our next moves. But our conversations were always in code, knowing full well that our parents or siblings might be listening on another phone, since they all shared the same line.

To be social in the early 1990's in the United States meant to be together, in the same space, or on the phone, likely with no inherent privacy. This time, of course, was unlike the world before the phone, in that nearly all communication was face to face; and it is unlike today, where almost all communication is remote and often asynchronous. The constant in all of these eras is that to be social is to exchange information, and that we use information and communications technologies (ICTs) to facilitate this exchange. In this chapter, we'll discuss the various ways that information intersects with the social nature of humanity, reflect on how technology has (and hasn't) changed communication, and raise questions about how new information technologies might change communication further.

|Conversation.jpg|A photograph of people talking at a restaurant|Face-to-face conversations are hard to beat for their intimacy, immediacy, and efficiency.|[Kevin Curtis|https://unsplash.com/photos/QlnUpMED6Qs]|

# Information and Communication

Information, in the most abstract sense, is a social phenomenon. All human communication is social in that it involves interactions between people. Writing, data, and other forms of archived information are social, in that they capture information that might have otherwise been communicated in forms separate from another person. Even biological information like DNA is social, in that we have elaborate and diverse social norms about how we share our DNA with each other through reproduction. Information is constructed socially, in that we create it with other people, shaped by our shared values, beliefs, practices, and knowledge; and we create it for the purpose shaping the values, beliefs, and practices, and knowledge of other people.

Similarly, information systems, including all of those intended for communication, are *sociotechnical*, in that they involve both social phenomena such as communication, as well as technology to facilitate or automate that communication. Libraries are social in that they are shared physical spaces for exchanging and sharing knowledge. The internet is social in that it is a shared virtual space for exchanging and sharing knowledge. Even highly informal information systems, like a group of friends chatting around a table, are sociotechnical, in that they rely on elaborate systems of verbal and non-verbal communication to facilitate exchange<argyle72>.

Our social interactions around information can vary along some key dimensions, broadly shaping what is known as *social presence*<short76>. For example, one dimension is the _intimacy_ of communication, which is the degree to which the many social cues in communication such as physical distance, eye contact, smiling, posture, and conversation topic establish feelings of emotional closeness. Another dimension is _immediacy_, which is the degree to which information has urgency in an exchange. Another dimension is _efficiency_, which is the degree to which a medium facilitates a message being delivered.

|Texting.jpg|A photograph of a woman texting outside.|Texting, unlike most other forms of communication, is always available|[Meghan Schiereck|https://unsplash.com/photos/_XFObcM_7KU]|

Each information technology has unique properties along these dimensions. For example, consider two popular forms:

* *Face-to-face communication* has high potential for intimacy, immediacy, and efficiency, as it affords multiple parallel channels for exchange, including speech, non-verbal cues, eye contact, facial expressions, and posture. It is also synchronous, in that the delay between sending a message and receiving it is effectively instantaneous because of the high speed of light and sound. And by using other information technology--paper, pens, whiteboards, smartphones, tablets--there is even richer potential to communicate efficiently and intimately through multiple media.

* *Texting* strips away most of the features of face-to-face communication, leaving an asynchronous stream of words, symbols (e.g., emoji), and more recently, images and video. It can achieve a different kind of intimacy because of its privacy, though it has many fewer channels in which to do this, and often results in miscommunication, especially of emotional information<wiseman18>. Because it is often asynchronous and usually at a distance, there is more time between exchanges, and therefore reduced immediacy. Moreover, because of the reduced channels, may be less efficient for particular kinds of information that are more easily conveyed with speech, gestures, or drawings.

These basic ideas in information and communication are just a fraction of the insights in numerous fields of research. _Communication_<fiske10> studies verbal, written, and non-verbal social interactions, detailing the strategies that we have for effectively conveying information to others in different media. _Social Psychology_<mcdougall15> studies the social nature of human beings and how our many social biases (e.g., in-grouping, which is the tendency to create artificial tribal boundaries around social interaction), influence what information we share and with whom and who we trust. _Organizational Behavior_<schermerhorn11> studies how social psychology and communication affect the shared goals we pursue through work. And _Social Computing_<parameswaran07> is a part of computing and information sciences that is concerned with all of these phenomena as they relate to computing, including computer-supported collaborative work, computer-mediated communication, and online communities.

|Reddit.jpg|A screenshot of Reddit from December 31st, 2020|Reddit hosts countless communities, each with its own interests, values, policies, and norms.|Amy J. Ko| 

# Communities

One place that these foundational aspects of communication play out is in *communities*, which may be anything from groups of people with strong ties to much larger groups that share some affinity, such as an interest, identity, practice, or belief system<wenger99>. A group of friends is a community, a church is a community, a university is a community, a hospital is a community, workplaces are communities, and even much broader affinity groups, such as LGTBQ+ people are community. None of these imply a particular strength of relational ties or homogeneity in experience--the LGBTQ+ community, for example, can be exceptionally heterogenous, with great rifts between different groups in experience, priorities, and beliefs. It is therefore not similarity that brings people together, but simply relationships around shared identities.

Communities relate to information in that much of what communities do is exchange information. Communities curate information with each other to promote learning and awareness, like active Wikipedia contributors create shared identity and practices around curating knowledge about special interests<pentzold10>. Communities provide expertise, as when software developer with particular technical expertise provide answers on Stack Overflow to common questions<mamykina11>. And communities shape beliefs, as when conspiracy communities leverage identity affirmation strategies to create tightly bound in-groups<padke20>. Therefore, when we consider the role of communities in information, it becomes clear that much of what information means is determined by the shared identities in our communities in which we create it.

|Kanye.jpg|A screenshot of a Kayne West tweet, "It's 1 am and I can't stop thinking about myself."|Sometimes you just need to tell the world what's on your mind.|Unknown|

The internet has led to a rapid exploration of information technologies to support community, revealing two major types of community supports. One support is *broadcasting*. Much like newspapers, radio, and television, online social media is often used to broadcast to community, where one person or a group of people broadly disseminate information to a broader community. It includes Usenet, which were the threaded discussion forums that shaped the internet and inspired later websites like Slashdot, Digg, and Reddit<hauben97>. They include blogging and micro-blogging such as the posting features of Instagram and Facebook, in which people broadcast personal experiences to seek affirmation, feedback, and connection<nardi04>. And it includes the darker parts of the web, such as 4chan and /b/, which spawn humor, but also conspiracy theories and hate speech<bernstein11>, as well as platforms like Gab, which amplify both free speech and hate speech resisting moderation<mathew20>.

Other communities are more focused on *discourse*, where communication is not primarily about broadcasting from one to many, but more mutually interactive communication and conversation. Most notably, since its launch, Facebook has been seen as a place to maintain close relationships, talking about shared interests, celebrating life milestones, or providing support in trying times<lampe08>. This also includes mailing lists, such as those used by cancer survivors to provide mutual support and aid<meier07>. General purpose social media websites often fail to protect marginalized communities from hate speech and harassment that emerges in discourse, and so some sites have emerged with specific supports for preventing these phenomena; for example, trans communities have created sites that ensure safety, privacy, content warnings, and strict moderation to safe spaces for support and encouragement<haimson20>.

|MySpace.jpg|A screenshot of a very bright pink MySpace page.|MySpace, which was the largest social networking service from 2005 to 2008, with 100 million active users.|Unknown|

It is rare that communities last forever. Some of the key reasons communities fade include<fiesler20>:

* Its members' needs and interests change, and so they leave one community for another.
* A platform's underlying information technology of a platforms decays, reducing trust in the archiving of information and the availability of the platform, resulting in migration to new platforms that are better maintained.
* Platform maintainers make design changes that are disruptive to community norms, such as the infamous [2018 Snapchat redesign|https://www.theverge.com/2018/2/21/17037100/snapchat-update-redesign-petition-response] that condensed stories and snapchats into a single "Friends" page.
* Platform policies evolve to become hostile to a community's values, or a community's values evolve and policies do not. For example, many experience harassment on Twitter, struggling to maintain block lists, and therefore leave<jhaver18>.

These demonstrate that while a community's communication is key, so are the underlying information systems designed and maintained to support them.

One key design choice in online communities is how to handle content moderation. All communities moderate somehow; at a minimum, platforms may only allow people with accounts to post, or may disallow content that is illegal where the community or platform operates. Most social media companies have a set of rules that govern what content is allowed, and they enforce those rules to varying degrees. For example, [Twitter|https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies/twitter-rules] does not currently allow violent threats, promotions of terrorism, encouragement of suicide, doxxing, or harassment. However, it does allow other content, such as *gaslighting*, which is a form of abuse that makes victims seem or feel "crazy"<sweet19>. Because of the challenges of centralizing moderation, many researchers are investing new forms of decentralized moderation, such as online harassment moderation systems that use friends instead of platform maintainers or moderators<mahar18>.

|Teamwork.jpg|A photograph of a group of people engaging in teamwork.|Teamwork is social, but it's also informational.|[Van Tay Media|https://unsplash.com/photos/Hh-PIe3qIug]|

# Collaboration, Coordination, and Crowds

Whereas communities often bring people together to share information about interests and identities, *work* is an entirely different form of social interaction, bringing people together to accomplished shared goals. As with communities, information and information technologies are central to work.

One way that information is central is that information facilitates *collaboration*, in which a group of people together to achieve a shared goal. Collaboration includes activities like _pair programming_, in which software developers write code together, making joint decisions, helping each other notice problems, and combining their knowledge to improve the quality of code<williams00>. Another example is using collaborative editing tools like [Google Docs|https://www.google.com/docs/about/] to create shared documents<jung17>. Collaboration benefits from information by helping establish what communications researchers call _grounding_ (a shared understanding of what is being talked about), and _awareness_ (knowledge of what a collaborator is working on)<gergle13>. These two distinct kinds of information are independently important for helping collaborators work toward shared goals, and information technologies must provide them to facilitate collaboration. For example, in group projects, it is equally important to develop agreement about what is being worked on (grounding), as well as sending regular updates about progress on that work (awareness). However, collaboration technologies can offer features that combine both of these information needs into a single feature. For example, the fact that Google Docs provides real-time awareness of where a collaborator's cursor is provides both awareness (because it indicates what a collaborator is working on) and grounding (because it is a proxy for what they might be talking about).

|Nascar.jpg|A photograph of a Nascar pit crew changing tires|A pit crew coordinates a shared goal, each person with a different job, but shared awareness of progress on individual tasks.|[Andrew Roberts|https://unsplash.com/photos/6lqk_bNnw_c]|

Whereas collaboration is about people in tandem toward a shared goal, *coordination* is about people working separately, and often asynchronously toward a shared goal, separated by time and space. For example, coordination includes large teams of software developers independently working on an application, but eventually integrating their work into a coherent whole<potvin16>. It also includes teams of doctors, nurses, and medical assistants coordinating care for patients<fitzpatrick13>. Coordination does not require grounding, in the sense that communication may be less synchronous, but it still requires--even more so--awareness of others' work, as well as awareness of _dependencies_ between different aspects of work. Without these two forms of awareness, teammates might do redundant work that has to be merged, conflicting work that has to be redone, or incoherent work that can't be integrated. Information technologies are key to providing this awareness of dependencies, sharing updates about teammates' contributions, warnings about conflicting work.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/Pjm1uYbuyk4|Amazon Mechanical Turk ad|Amazon Mechanical Turk helps you delegate work to strangers, but it doesn't pay fair wages.|Amazon|

In general, information technologies struggle to support collaboration and coordination, especially in conditions like remote work where the baseline capacity for communication is low. Distance work, for example, really only succeeds when groups have high common ground, loosely coupled work with few dependencies, and a strong commitment for both collaboration and collaboration technologies succeed, reducing the need for communication, collaboration, and coordination<olson09>. One active area of research on ensuring these conditions is crowd work, in which groups of strangers come together to complete tasks (Wikipedia, Mechanical Turk, Uber, 99designs, TopCoder); all of these succeed because there is almost no requirement for coordination, collaboration, or communication, and tasks are well-specified<kittur13>. In contrast, groups that have poor common ground and/or highly coupled work with significant dependencies experience much higher demand for communication, straining relationships and complicating work.

Information technology has struggled to prevent these strains for many reasons. First and foremost, research is clear on what aspects of face-to-face communication are necessary and why they are necessary, but even after decades of research, technology simply cannot support them<ackerman00>. For example, we know that for video chat to have the same fidelity as face to face chat that it needs no latency, clear visibility of non-verbal gestures, natural eye contact, and a sense of shared space, but none of these are yet viable. 

Organizations are also often ineffective at deploying collaboration tools<grudin88>:

* There are disparities between who does the work and who benefits. For example, using meeting scheduling software that allows the scheduler to easily see busy status helps the scheduler, but requires everyone else to carefully maintain their busy status.
* Collaboration tools require critical mass. For example, if only some people on your team adopts Slack, Slack is less useful, because you don’t get the information you need from the entire team.
* Collaboration tools don't handle exceptions well. For example, sharing a Google Doc with someone without a Google account either requires exporting it, opening up permissions, or not sharing it with them at all.

Thus, despite many decades of innovation and adoption in industry, working together still works best face-to-face in the same physical space.

-

Clearly, information technology has changed how we communicate, and in some ways, it has even changed what we communicate, allowing us to share more than words. And yet, as we have seen throughout this chapter, it hasn't really changed the fundamental challenges of communication, nor has it supplanted the richness of face-to-face communication. What it has done is expanded the ways we communication, and deepened our understanding of what makes communication work, challenging us to adapt to an ever more complex array of ways of being social.

# Podcasts

* [Can Big Tech Make Sure That 2020 Is Not 2016?, Sway|https://sway.simplecast.com/episodes/can-big-tech-make-sure-that-2020-is-not-2016-j1sOJ9zx]. Discusses how social media platforms are amending policies around political advertising and disinformation.

* [You Missed a Spot, On the Media|https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/otm/episodes/on-the-media-you-missed-a-spot]. Discusses content moderation, deplatforming, free speech, and the future of social media.

* [I Love Section 230. Got a Problem With That?, The Argument, NY Times|https://the-argument.simplecast.com/episodes/trump-section-230-facebook-twitter-trump-i8CQUVde]. A debate on Section 230, the left's desire for more aggressive moderation, the right's desire for less, and the surprising ways that the policy has created a marketplace for online speech.

* [Restoring Justice Online, On the Media|https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/otm/episodes/on-the-media-fix-the-internet]. Discusses conflict and harassment online and how methods of restorative justice hold promise to rehabilitate online communities suffering from interpersonal conflict.